= Introduction

The eight chapters of this small book follow a similar theme to that of
_Unexpected Freedom_, published in 2005. The second chapter in that book
was titled 'We Are All Translators', and was aimed especially at
encouraging readers to discern the relevance of the Buddhist teachings
as they moved from East to West. The Buddha didn't want his followers to
merely believe in him. And he didn't teach simply so that scholars might
argue over what he said. He was clear in his invitation for all those
interested in truth to take the teachings inwards and learn to see for
themselves that path which leads to freedom from suffering. The
contemplations shared here in _Alert To The Needs Of The Journey_ are
similarly offered to encourage anyone interested in following in the
direction pointed out by the Buddha -- and to keep looking until they
discover a confidence which translates naturally into selflessly wise
and compassionate action.

The contents of this book are not transcribed talks per se, they are
more adaptations of talks. The original talks were given in the Dhamma
Hall at Aruna Ratanagiri Monastery as part of the regular Sunday evening
puja. Most were delivered during the Winter Retreat of 2017 to a
gathering of the resident monastic sangha and members of the visiting
lay community.

Many friends and supporters have assisted in preparing this material for
publication. I am most grateful to them all.

For audio versions of the talks from which this material was sourced â€“

https://ratanagiri.org.uk/teachings

Ajahn Munindo +
Aruna Ratanagiri Monastery, +
Northumberland, +
Great Britain +
November 2017
